=================================
What's new in Pigweed: March 2026
=================================
.. changelog_highlights_start

Highlights:

* Kernel: :ref:`changelog-2026-03-kernel-async-ipc` - Added non-blocking IPC
  syscalls to ``pw_kernel``.

* C++ data structures and utilities: :ref:`changelog-2026-03-cpp-dynamic-map` -
  A new sorted map container that uses a caller-provided ``pw::Allocator`` to
  dynamically allocate nodes.

* Kernel: :ref:`changelog-2026-03-kernel-process-management` - ``pw_kernel``
  processes can now be terminated from inside or outside of the process, and
  the new process ownership model makes it possible to wait for a process
  to terminate.

* Toolchains and compilers: :ref:`changelog-2026-03-toolchain-toolchain-tools` -
  The active toolchain's tools (e.g. ``objdump``, ``readelf``, etc.) can now be
  used interactively via ``bazelisk run``.

* Async and concurrency: :ref:`changelog-2026-03-async-boxed-future` -
  ``BoxedFuture`` uses type-erasure and dynamic allocation to make it
  easier to work with futures of different types.

.. changelog_highlights_end

---------------------
Async and concurrency
---------------------

.. _changelog-2026-03-async-boxed-future:

Handle futures of varying types with BoxedFuture
================================================
``pw::async2::BoxedFuture`` makes it easier to store or return futures
of different concrete types. It type-erases futures and stores them
dynamically via ``pw::Allocator``, hiding the concrete type. Example:

.. code-block:: cpp

   #include "pw_async2/box.h"

   pw::async2::BoxedFuture<MyData> GetData(pw::Allocator& alloc, bool use_cache) {
     if (use_cache) {
       // Return a future of one type in this scenario…
       return pw::async2::BoxFuture(alloc, cache_.ReadData());
     } else {
       // And a future of a different type in this other scenario.
       return pw::async2::BoxFuture(alloc, network_.FetchData());
     }
   }

Commits: `1 <https://pwrev.dev/374633>`__

.. _changelog-2026-03-async-await-macro:

Simplified polling with PW_AWAIT
================================
``PW_AWAIT`` is a helper macro that simplifies the process of
blocking on a future that's not ready. Example:

.. code-block:: cpp

   #include "pw_async2/await.h"

   Poll<> MyReceiverTask::DoPend(Context& cx) {
     // If we don't have a future to wait on, start one.
     if (!receive_future_.is_pendable()) {
       receive_future_ = channel_.Receive();
     }

     // Wait for the future to complete. If it returns Pending,
     // this function itself will also return Pending.
     PW_AWAIT(auto result, receive_future_, cx);

     // Once ready, we can use the result.
     ProcessData(result);

     return Ready();
   }

Commits: `1 <https://pwrev.dev/371733>`__

.. _changelog-2026-03-async-rework:

Coroutine and task rework
=========================
Allocation failures within coroutines are now easier to manage. A failure
now automatically goes up to the top-level ``CoroTask`` (which crashes) or
``FallibleCoroTask`` (if you want to handle the failures). This means that
you're no longer required to return ``Status`` or ``Result`` from your coro
functions and can instead use any return type, as in typical in async code
from other languages. Example:

.. code-block:: cpp

   // Previously had to return `Result<int>` to account for potential
   // allocation failure.
   Coro<int> AsyncAdd(ValueProvider<int>& a, ValueProvider<int>& b) {
     co_return co_await a.Get() + co_await b.Get();
   }

Commits: `1 <https://pwrev.dev/382232>`__, `2 <https://pwrev.dev/374695>`__,
`3 <https://pwrev.dev/373733>`__

---------
Bluetooth
---------

.. _changelog-2026-03-net-sapphire-allocator:

Allocator support for buffers and packets in pw_bluetooth_sapphire
==================================================================
Updated ``DynamicByteBuffer``, ``CommandPacket``, and ``EventPacket`` to accept
an optional ``pw::Allocator&``, allowing for more flexible memory management.

Commits: `1 <https://pwrev.dev/373375>`__

---------------------------------
C++ data structures and utilities
---------------------------------

.. _changelog-2026-03-cpp-dynamic-map:

Dynamically allocated maps with pw::DynamicMap
==============================================
``pw::DynamicMap`` is a new sorted map container that uses a
caller-provided ``pw::Allocator`` to dynamically allocate nodes.
Example:

.. code-block:: cpp

   #include "pw_containers/dynamic_map.h"

   void UseDynamicMap(pw::Allocator& alloc) {
     pw::DynamicMap<int, std::string> map(alloc);

     // Add elements to the map in all the usual ways.
     map.insert({1, "one"});
     map.emplace(2, "two");
     map[3] = "three";
   }

Commits: `1 <https://pwrev.dev/359892>`__, `2 <https://pwrev.dev/377812>`__

.. _changelog-2026-03-cpp-intrusive-queue:

New FIFO queue with performant push and pop operations
======================================================
``pw::IntrusiveQueue`` is a new FIFO queue container that uses intrusive links
to provide O(1) push and pop operations. Example:

.. code-block:: cpp

   #include "pw_containers/intrusive_queue.h"

   // Elements must derive from IntrusiveQueue<T>::Item
   class MyItem : public pw::IntrusiveQueue<MyItem>::Item {
    public:
     MyItem(int value) : value_(value) {}
     int value() const { return value_; }

    private:
     int value_;
   };

   void UseQueue() {
     pw::IntrusiveQueue<MyItem> queue;

     MyItem item1(1);
     MyItem item2(2);

     // O(1) push to back
     queue.push_back(item1);
     queue.push_back(item2);

     // O(1) pop from front
     if (!queue.empty()) {
       MyItem& front = queue.front();
       queue.pop_front();
     }
   }

Commits: `1 <https://pwrev.dev/388292>`__

---------------
Developer tools
---------------

.. _changelog-2026-03-dev-ide-tools:

Improved pw_ide reliability
===========================
The new ``ide_query`` tool in ``pw_ide`` provides a unified interface for
querying IDE-related information from the build system, abstracting away the
specifics of underlying build systems. Compile commands were updated to
extract dependencies and use relative paths for better portability.

Commits: `1 <https://pwrev.dev/379120>`__, `2 <https://pwrev.dev/385152>`__,
`3 <https://pwrev.dev/388960>`__, `4 <https://pwrev.dev/379121>`__

------
Kernel
------

.. _changelog-2026-03-kernel-async-ipc:

Async IPC
=========
Added ``channel_async_transact``, ``channel_async_transact_complete``, and
``channel_async_cancel`` syscalls to ``pw_kernel``, enabling non-blocking IPC.

Commits: `1 <https://pwrev.dev/381192>`__

.. _changelog-2026-03-kernel-process-management:

Process termination and ownership
=================================
Processes and their associated threads can now be terminated from either
inside or outside the process. The new process ownership model enables
waiting for threads and processes to terminate via ``join``. Example:

.. code-block:: rust

   // 1. Wait for all threads in the process to terminate.
   for thread_ref in thread_refs {
       let thread = thread_ref.join(kernel)?;
       let _ = thread.consume();
   }

   // 2. Wait for the process itself to terminate.
   let process = process_ref.join(kernel)?;
   let _ = process.consume();

Commits: `1 <https://pwrev.dev/381532>`__, `2 <https://pwrev.dev/380472>`__

.. _changelog-2026-03-kernel-reduce-footprint:

Reduce footprint of kernel-only applications
============================================
The kernel no longer compiles userspace support code when building a kernel-only
application, reducing binary size by over 2.6 KB on Cortex-M and RISC-V.

.. note::

   Userspace is compiled in by default. When building a kernel-only image you
   need to disable userspace in the ``system_image``.

Commits: `1 <https://pwrev.dev/380032>`__

---
RPC
---

.. _changelog-2026-03-rpc-transfer-multi-client:

Support multiple clients on a transfer thread in pw_transfer
============================================================
Multiple ``pw_transfer`` clients can now share a single transfer thread.
Note that they can't run transfers concurrently. Starting a transfer on
one will terminate active transfers on the other. Example:

.. code-block:: cpp

   #include "pw_transfer/client.h"
   #include "pw_transfer/transfer_thread.h"

   void SetupTransferClients(pw::rpc::Client& rpc_client, uint32_t channel_id) {
     // Create a single transfer thread supporting 2 concurrent client transfers.
     std::array<std::byte, 64> chunk_buffer;
     std::array<std::byte, 64> encode_buffer;
     pw::transfer::Thread<2, 0> transfer_thread(chunk_buffer, encode_buffer);

     // Create multiple clients sharing the same thread.
     pw::transfer::Client client1(rpc_client, channel_id, transfer_thread);
     pw::transfer::Client client2(rpc_client, channel_id, transfer_thread);

     // Both clients can now be used independently but share the same thread.
   }

Commits: `1 <https://pwrev.dev/386752>`__

------------------------
Toolchains and compilers
------------------------

.. _changelog-2026-03-toolchain-toolchain-tools:

Access toolchain tools through Bazelisk
=======================================
Because compilers, linkers, and other toolchain tools are downloaded
and managed automatically via Bazel, they are part of the Bazel environment rather than
your local shell environment. This means there is typically no easy way to
simply run tools like ``nm`` or ``objdump``.

To address this, Pigweed now provides wrapper targets that allow you to run
the following toolchain tools interactively via ``bazelisk run``:

* ``ar``,
* ``c++``
* ``cc``
* ``cov``
* ``ld``
* ``nm``
* ``objdump``
* ``readelf``
* ``size``
* ``strip``

Example:

.. code-block:: console

   $ bazelisk run --config=rp2350 //pw_toolchain/cc/current_toolchain:nm -- "$PWD/bazel-bin/pw_status/status_test"
   INFO: Analyzed target //pw_toolchain/cc/current_toolchain:nm (0 packages loaded, 1 target configured).
   INFO: Found 1 target...
   Target //pw_toolchain/cc/current_toolchain:nm up-to-date:
     bazel-bin/pw_toolchain/cc/current_toolchain/nm
   INFO: Elapsed time: 1.812s, Critical Path: 1.05s
   INFO: 5 processes: 5 internal.
   INFO: Build completed successfully, 5 total actions
   INFO: Running command line: bazel-bin/pw_toolchain/cc/current_toolchain/nm <args omitted>
   10000110 W ADC_IRQ_FIFO_Handler
   10000110 W BusFault_Handler
   10000110 W CLOCKS_IRQ_Handler
   10000110 W DMA_IRQ_0_Handler
   10000110 W DMA_IRQ_1_Handler
   10000110 W DMA_IRQ_2_Handler
   10000110 W DMA_IRQ_3_Handler
   10000110 W DebugMon_Handler
   1000011c W HardFault_Handler
   00000800 a HeapSize
   10000110 W I2C0_IRQ_Handler
   10000110 W I2C1_IRQ_Handler
   10000110 W IO_IRQ_BANK0_Handler
   10000110 W IO_IRQ_BANK0_NS_Handler
   10000110 W IO_IRQ_QSPI_Handler
   10000110 W IO_IRQ_QSPI_NS_Handler
   10000110 W MemManage_Handler
   1000011a W NMI_Handler
   10000110 W OTP_IRQ_Handler
   # …

Commits: `1 <https://pwrev.dev/382478>`__
